Proposal - Schema for Batch Messages (#166)
LibertyDSNP/frequency: designdocs/logical_batching.md

# Summary

In other documents, we explore ways to structure an explicit batch of messages.
That is, in terms of concrete structure. This document has a different aim --
deriving the idea of a batch logically, as a product of fields present on other
entities in our system.

## Background

We are currently experimenting with a new system architecture that has the
following entities:

1. Schema
   - id: u16
   - format: Format

>    - format_type: FormatType

Reviewer: Reminder to modify this to match whatever the decision is for what this will end up being called. I think we said `Model` and `ModelType` yesterday.

# Summary

In other documents, we explore ways to structure an explicit batch of messages.
That is, in terms of concrete structure. This document has a different aim --
deriving the idea of a batch logically, as a product of fields present on other

> entities in our system.

Reviewer 2: So are we registering a Batch Message Schema using these fields?  Would that be the story to write from this document?

Reviewer 3: I'm working on writing those stories. Here is the list I have so far to do:

- Story to add Format Type to the Schema (pointing to an enum with just Avro currently)
- Story to document Avro Format Type requirements
- Story to add Payload Location (on-chain only enum) to the Schema
  - Dependent-story to add the off-chain to the enum and support it in the message_pallet
- Story to add Parquet to the Format Type enum and document Parquet Format Type requirements

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/LibertyDSNP/mrc/milestone/11

Reviewer 2: This design doc needs to specify what fields are in a Batch message, including types.  If it's not settled then there's no Design Doc to write. If it's settled, it should be documented so that the stories can refer back to the Design Doc for implementation.

The Design Doc template is also part of the process, it's intended to help write the document.  Not all sections may need to be there (glossary or table of contents are two obvious examples)

## Background

We are currently experimenting with a new system architecture that has the
following entities:

1. Schema

>    - Id

Reviewer 2: All these fields need types.  Also, are we going to have a "pay more" type of field? We were originally going to use the file size but @wilwade suggested it be something more general. Don't know what it would be called.

Reviewer 3: Re: pay more / files size

I think we should stick with `payload_size` (perhaps `payload_size_bytes`?) for now, although for clarity that goes under message (line 18/19) not Schema (which is where some form of pay more setup might go)

   - Format
   - FormatType
   - PayloadLocation
2. Message
   - Off-chain / On-chain Payload

*Protocols* would be responsible for indicating not only the shape of the

> underlying payload, but also its format and location. This is important, because

Reviewer 2: We went back to using Schema instead of Protocol, based on what I heard at doc day yesterday.

a protocol's format property would indicate whether a given payload contains a
batch or not.

## FormatType

> Payloads can either be of format type `PARQUET` or `AVRO`. These file formats

Reviewer 2: Are these going to be enums?

indicate specifically whether their payloads are singular or arrays of objects
(More info needed here).

## PayloadLocation

> The combination of format and location constrain possible payload types:

Reviewer 2: This could use a little more elaboration.

Author: Agreed, I'm not sure what else to say here though. I'm open to suggestions.

> ```txt
> | Format  | Location        | Payload           |
> -------------------------------------------------
> | Avro   | On-chain         | Public Graph      |
> | Parquet| On-chain         | ??                |
> | Avro   | IPFS (Off-chain) | Private Graph (?) |
> | Parquet| IPFS (Off-chain) | Announcement      |
> ```

Reviewer 3: The payload column should just be Examples. Perhaps something like:
```suggestion
```txt
| Format  | Location        | Examples           |
-------------------------------------------------
| Avro   | On-chain         | DSNP Graph Change      |
| Parquet| On-chain         | Unknown                |
| Avro   | IPFS (Off-chain) | Larger Avro structures |
| Parquet| IPFS (Off-chain) | DSNP Broadcast or Reply Announcements      |
```
```

(More needed here).

## Message Payloads

Message payloads can be either on-chain or off-chain. If they are off-chain,

> there is a good chance that they will be located on IPFS.

Reviewer 2: Off-chain file URIs should be IPFS CIDv2 as shown here: https://github.com/LibertyDSNP/mrc/blob/main/designdocs/batched_messages.md#types
I'm not aware of any indecision about that; having a URI be content addressable is a requirement.

## Batch as a Logical Construct

We can circumvent defining a batch explicitly if we leverage the file format
included in the protocol. Since both Avro and Parquet file types declare whether
or not they contain single or plural values, the format itself could indicate
whether or not the message is a batch.

## Rationale

There are some upsides to deriving batching logically from existing structures.

> One is costsavings. Not having a batch structure means we don't need to worry

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One is cost savings. Not having a batch structure means we don't need to worry
```
